---
layout: post
title: I cannot read!
---

How many times have we heard, I cannot read?
We have reached a problem in regards to why a patient cannot read with the latest, greatest, personalized, individualized, free form, digitally surfaced progressive lens.  We have all been there, the patient purchased a new digital progressive with the promise that the vision would be better,  they woulc have wider intermediate and reading with the sharpest vision imaginable!
They come back a few days later to pick up there glasses and to the surprise of the patient they cannot see better or they see the same through the old pair.
To understand why they cannot read we need to take a step back to the days when we used to adjust a lens power for vertex distance using a distometer wheel or the vertex distance formula $\frac{dD^{2}}{1000}$ where $d$ is the distance moved in millimeter and $D$ is the power.  You can see with the formula that a 7.00 diopter lens will change a 0.25 D if moved 5 millimeters.  What we are doing is changing the power to give the patient the intended Rx from the refractionists.  After we made the Rx change we would call he refractionists to let them know and make a note in our file.  This does not happen much anymore, except in the case of contact lenses.  When the patient comes back in for another refraction hopefully the note was put in the file, if not, the glasses are neutralized and the new starting Rx is either a 0.25 D strong or weak or they start from the last refraction.   
Back to our patient who cannot read.  We need to know what they were wearing before, was it a traditional progressive(i.e not digital), if it was a digital progressive, was it a variable corridor, was the Rx compensated in the previous pair.  Let's take the first scenario, they were wearing a traditional style progessive before the switch.  
Before we go deeper we need to understand that a non compensaed progressive is like the vertex compensation above.  If we did not compensate the lens above then the person would be looking through the wrong power.  It is quite possible that the person wearing the tradional progressive has been wearing the wrong reading power because of downward eye rotation, change in vertex, wrap, and face form.  Keep in mind the phoroptor has no PoW (Position of Wear).If the patient above was a 46 year old with plano at distance wearing a 2.00 add with the traditional progressive, they could be looking through a +2.15 at near.  This takes into account a 12 mm vertex, 9$^o$ pantoscopic angle, 6$^{o}$ wrap angle, and a 22$^{o}$ (~10mm) downward gaze. The new Rx is a +0.25 at distance with 